It's usual to find full-length club hairs in your comb or pillow. If you've never heard of club hair, it's the point at which hair's growth cycle ends. As strands of hair form, they push out club hairs to make way for new hair to grow. In this blog, we will learn about the causes, treatments, and prevention of club hair.
Understanding Club Hair
The term "club hair" may conjure up memories of late-night partying and deafening music, but it refers to a certain type of hair strand. To be honest, this is a perfectly regular hair strand. Simply put, club hairs are completely grown hair strands that no longer develop. They're completely normal and shouldn't cause any concern.
What is Club Hair?
Club hair is a regular, fully developed strand that has ceased growing. It is named after the bulbous, club-like appearance at the end of the hair where keratin has accumulated. Club hairs emerge during the catagen phase of the
hair growth
cycle, which is a period in between growth and rest.
The Hair Growth Cycle Explained
To understand what club hairs are, you must first understand that every hair on your head has a life cycle that includes each of the following phases:
Anagen phase
:
This is the growth phase, in which the hair strand reaches its full length. At any given time, approximately 90% of scalp hair is in this phase.
Catagen phase
: The hair follicle shrinks, hair growth slows, and your hair prepares for the following phase. As part of this transition, a keratin bulb (or club) forms at the end of the hair strand (the same type of protein that makes up the rest of your hair).
Telogen phase
:
During this resting phase, the hair remains in place but does not grow.
After the telogen phase, the hair falls out, and the cycle repeats. However, the club created during the catagen phase retains the hair follicle in your head for some time after it has stopped growing. When you run your fingers through your hair and pluck a few strands, you're usually holding club hairs, which have a tiny, nearly invisible bulb at the base.
Causes of Club Hair
Club hairs form when a hair follicle reaches the end of its development cycle and stops expanding. Hair growth requires blood flow, and proper circulation delivers nutrients to hair follicles. This is why massaging your scalp improves circulation and hair development. In the case of club hair, the hair follicle that holds the strand becomes dormant and shrinks, preventing blood supply to the club hair. Without a blood supply, club hair cannot grow, but it will remain attached to the follicle for up to three or four months. Club hairs do not form overnight. Club hair might take up to two weeks to develop. These hairs develop at the end of the catagen phase, which is the transitional period between the growth and resting phases.
Common Triggers of Club Hair Formation
High fever, trauma, and major surgery are all potential causes of abrupt shedding. Certain drugs may also cause an increase in the amount of club hair. The most prevalent medications are beta blockers, retinoids, blood thinners, hormone therapy, and vaccinations. Other disorders that might impact hair health and cause excessive club hair include:
Genetics
low-protein diet or crash dieting.
Thyroid problems
Starting or stopping particular medications.
After childbirth
Menopause
Vitamin deficiencies
Chemotherapy
Heavy metal intake
If an infection is causing abnormal club hairs, your doctor may prescribe antibiotics to help clear it up.
How the Telogen Phase Affects Hair Health
This is the resting stage of your hair's development cycle. The hair follicle is dormant, with a white keratin bulb at the root (club hair). The keratin bulb retains the hair in the follicle until it sheds, after which the hair growth cycle begins again.
Treatment Options for Club Hair
The good news is that excess club hairs are usually only transitory and will fade away on their own. A short-term illness, infection, pregnancy, or new drugs can all cause increased
hair loss
.  If you have an exceptionally large number of club hairs for no apparent cause, consult a physician for a diagnosis of any underlying issues. They may perform blood work and testing, including:
Hair loss count
Hair pull test
Hair pluck test
Dermatoscopy
Trichogram
Medical Treatments for Club Hair
Minoxidil
, a topical medicine, is one of the most popular telogen effluvium therapies. Applying it to your scalp causes hair follicles to enter the anagen phase of the hair growth cycle. This may cause some temporary hair loss, but within a few months, you should see healthy hair growth returning. According to studies, minoxidil users may see a roughly 20% boost in hair growth over 48 weeks, but it should be used with caution because it might cause blood pressure issues for some people.
You can get minoxidil foam or minoxidil solution over the counter, depending on your desire. If you have male pattern
baldness
(also known as androgenetic alopecia) and telogen effluvium, talk to your doctor or
dermatologists
about finasteride, another FDA-approved hair loss medication.  Finasteride prevents your body from turning testosterone into dihydrotestosterone (DHT), which can bind to and shrink hair follicles, resulting in male pattern hair loss. There is a spray for it, by the way.
Natural Remedies to Improve Hair Health
Caffeine
: Caffeine is not only beneficial in your morning cup of coffee. According to studies, topical caffeine enhances skin and hair health. Caffeine may be the most promising natural hair growth remedy.
Melatonin
: You may be familiar with melatonin as a sleep aid. However, it is also an
antioxidant
that can benefit skin health and may be an effective natural hair-growth treatment.
Vitamins and supplements
: Nutritional deficits can cause hair loss and thinning. According to this rationale, supplementing a poor diet with specific vitamins and minerals may help with alopecia. For years, several substances have been advertised as natural hair growth cures.
Scalp massage
: Scalp massage is a popular hair growth treatment. It does not require any pills or injections, and it feels great. It reduces stress chemicals such as cortisol. Scalp massages may also help with hair development by boosting blood flow to the scalp and activating hair follicles.
Essential oils (peppermint and rosemary oil)
: Essential oils are concentrated plant extracts that retain their organic properties. Two popular essential
hair oils
people use to promote hair growth are peppermint oil and rosemary oil.
Jojoba oil
: Jojoba oil lowers inflammation and helps repair the skin’s surface. It’s used as a micro-emulsion in various beauty products because it helps active ingredients get absorbed into the skin. In other words, think of jojoba oil as a vehicle that transports beneficial supplements to the hair follicle.
Castor oil
: Ricinoleic acid, a component of castor oil, is a vegetable oil that may reduce inflammation.
Coconut oil
: Triglyceride (fat) coconut oil has a particular composition that facilitates its easy absorption into the hair shaft. It is also loaded with vitamins and good fats.
Rice water
: For ages, several East Asian societies have used rice water as a natural hair growth agent. Rice water is the residual liquid collected after rinsing rice.
Effective Hair Care Routines
Taking appropriate care of your hair might help prevent excessive shedding of club hair. That entails avoiding both extremely tight hairstyles and harsh chemicals. They tend to harm hair, and damaged hair is more likely to break. Tight hairstyles can also induce traction alopecia, a permanent hair loss caused by excessive tension on the hair follicles. Instead, adopt the following hair-care habits:
Maintain proper hygiene for your scalp and hair. If you have
dandruff
, a dandruff detox shampoo can help keep your scalp clean and comfortable.
Use gentle hairstyling techniques, and never brush your hair too roughly.
Try hair loss
shampoos
, such as our thickening shampoo with saw palmetto. Our volumizing shampoo and
conditioner
can also enhance the appearance of limp, thin hair.
Hydrating hair products can help repair damaged, dry hair.
To stimulate your hair follicles, give yourself frequent scalp massages.
Preventing Club Hair
Club hair shedding is a normal phenomenon that cannot be completely avoided. However, maintaining a healthy lifestyle and hair care routine helps reduce excessive shedding and encourages healthy hair growth.
Nutritional Support for Healthy Hair
Protein
:
Keratin, a hardened protein, is responsible for the structure of your hair. When your protein supplies are insufficient, the creation of this crucial building block slows, resulting in slower and poorer hair growth. Lean meats like chicken and turkey, as well as seafood like tuna, halibut, and tilapia, are excellent sources of protein. Tofu, quinoa, low-fat mozzarella, and cottage cheeses are all excellent choices.
Biotin
:
Lentils contain biotin, which has been demonstrated to increase hair development. Biotin interacts with cell enzymes to help generate amino acids, which are the molecules that make up the previously stated proteins. Researchers have even shown that too little biotin might cause hair loss. Other nutritious options include carrots, almonds, walnuts, and cauliflower.
Iron
:
Your hair follicles get nutritious oxygen from the iron in your red blood cells. While the level of iron in your blood may be considered normal, there is a risk that you have low ferritin—the "bank" of iron that your body keeps on hand to draw from as needed. Low ferritin levels have been associated with slowed or stopped hair growth, as well as shedding.
Omega-3 Fatty Acids:
Omega-3s can be found in the cell membranes of your scalp's skin as well as the natural oils that your scalp and hair create resulting in
oily scalp
, to keep themselves hydrated. Getting enough of these important fatty acids will help you avoid a
dry scalp
and promote hair growth and shine. Eating wild salmon and other fatty fish twice a week, such as striped sea bass or mackerel, will provide a healthy amount of omega-3s.
Water
: While your locks are mostly made of protein, they are also made of water and require moisture to prevent dryness and breakage. In addition to using a leave-in conditioner or other hydrating products to soften strands, make sure to hydrate yourself by drinking lots of water every day. Eating water-rich fruits and vegetables also helps to keep your body hydrated.
B Vitamins
:
B6, B12, and folate help to produce red blood cells, which transport oxygen and nutrients throughout the body, including the scalp and hair follicles. If you don't receive enough B vitamins, your hair's cells can hunger, causing it to shed, grow slowly, and break easily. Pork tenderloin is high in these vitamins, but if you don't consume pork, beans, poultry, oats, and low-fat dairy products are other excellent sources.
Vitamin C
: This vital nutrient accomplishes several things to promote healthy hair:
Vitamin C
improves iron absorption. It is also utilized to generate
collagen
, a structural fiber found in the body's connective tissue and required by hair follicles for proper growth. Vitamin C-rich foods include bell peppers, thyme, parsley, kale, Brussels sprouts, oranges, and strawberries.
Zinc
:
This mineral strengthens your hair follicles and prevents hair loss by attaching to proteins. It also helps your oil glands operate properly, protecting your hair from dryness and dandruff. Shellfish such as oysters, crabs, lobster, clams, and mussels contain a high concentration of zinc.
Scalp Health Tips and Practices
Washing oily hair more frequently.
Concentrate your shampoo on your scalp.
Apply conditioner following each shampoo.
Apply conditioner mainly to the ends of your hair.
Select shampoo and conditioner that are made especially for the type of hair you have.
Protect your hair while you're swimming.
Choosing the Right Hair Care Products
When selecting a shampoo for damaged hair, seek out products that are specifically designed to heal and nourish hair. These shampoos frequently include elements like keratin, biotin, and natural oils, which can help to strengthen the hair, increase suppleness, and prevent future damage.
Conclusion: Maintaining Optimal Hair and Scalp Health
If you see a little bulb at the end of one of your hair strands, you probably have club hair. Don't worry, club hairs aren't a problem on their own.
Club hairs resemble regular hairs, but they have a small light-colored or black bulb at the end of each strand.
Clubbed hairs are normal. When fully formed hairs stop growing, they form club hairs. The club-shaped bulb simply holds the hair in place until it falls out.
However, excessive club hair can be problematic. They may indicate that your normal hair growth cycle is being disrupted. Healthy lifestyle choices, hair care techniques, and hair loss treatments can all help to maintain normal hair growth.
Whether you have club hair or not, if you are experiencing sudden hair loss, you should seek medical attention from a qualified professional. Hair loss can be a symptom of an underlying medical condition.