Are you looking for all the premium and opulent brands at your fingertips? Or are you disheartened because all the international skincare and haircare brands are levying huge shipping costs on their products? Well, don’t be discouraged, because now is the time to sit back, unwind and relax, as we at
Clinikally
are bringing all the opulent, luxury skincare and haircare brands from all around the world to your doorstep, and it won’t even take 80 days! Introducing
Clinikally Luxe
, your gate pass to all the things luxury and premium.
Clinikally Luxe: Bridging the Luxury Gap
As per various statistics, the Indian luxury skincare and haircare market is projected to experience an annual growth of 2.89% in the next 4 years. It is generally attributed to various factors, with increase in the disposable income and awareness regarding skincare and hair care regimens, being the primary driving factors. To add our input in this growing market,
Clinikally Luxe
is introducing high-end transformative skin care and premium hair care dermatologically approved products in our already existing vast range. Indulge in the science-backed beauty products, as we are making high-end beauty products with advanced skincare technologies and luxurious hair nourishment solutions easily accessible to everyone, with just a single click.
Handpicked for Excellence: Our Dermatologist-Approved Brands
We at Clinikally Luxe have curated an exhaustive list of various international brands that are loved and hugely recommended by our dermatologists. If the viral
Korean Skincare
products that promise glass skin is what you want, delve into the plethora of products by
Cosrx
, Shangpree, and Genosys. If it’s the West that attracts you, we have got you covered with various “Made in U.S.A'' products. Explore the variety provided by
Coola
,
CeraVe
,
Crystal Tomato
and
iS Clinical
. If it’s the French TLC that draws your attention, Clinikally Luxe is at your service with a vast range of products by
Avene,
Embryolisse Laboratoires
and
Rene Furterer
. But this is not all. We have an extensive catalogue sourced from Switzerland, Japan and all other nooks and corners of the world. You name it and we have it!
But if ‘Made in India’ is what you demand, we have a range of in-house products by
Clinikally
. These are not only dermatologist approved formulas, but are the formulas that are specifically formulated by the top dermatologists of India. Apart from that, we provide various beloved Indian premium skincare and haircare brands like
Beautywise
and
Nutrova
, among many others. These brands and their products are specifically handpicked by our dermatologists to help you experience transformative skincare and luxurious hair nourishment. Explore
Clinikally Luxe
to view our entire catalogue that offers luxury skincare and premium haircare.
Science Meets Luxury: The Efficacy Behind Our Selection
While creating the exhaustive catalogue for Clinikally Luxe, dermatologists aimed at selecting those products which had ingredients that not only specifically targets an issue but also is gentle on the skin. The dermatologists also looked for those ingredients that are reputed for their skin healing properties due to its mechanism of action. The other approach while selecting the products was that those ingredients trace their way back to the cultural roots of a particular place, as many times ‘Old is Gold’. All these attributes, in combination with those reputed brands that are known for their good formulations, ethical sourcing and a responsible attitude towards the environment, found their way to Clinikally Luxe.
Exclusive Benefits of Clinikally Luxe Membership
In addition to all the luxury products, we at Clinikally also provide luxury services to our clients. Clinikally Luxe Membership  is one of such kinds. Signing up for Clinikally Luxe Membership, you may get you various perks such as
Early Access to New Launches
Early Access to Sales
Quick Delivery
Omnichannel Benefits
Priority Customer Support
Engaging Chatbot for Customer Queries
Exclusive Offers
This benefits list is growing and expanding and will continue to evolve over time to serve you with the best products for skincare and haircare. With exclusive beauty membership of Clinikally Luxe, you receive an exposure to advanced skincare technologies and premium hair treatment brands
Elevate Your Beauty Routine with Elite Club Privileges
With priority deliveries and customer support, your skincare regimen can continue to grow without any abruptions. This shall ensure that not even a single day of skincare and haircare routine is missed. As a result, your skincare and haircare routine will attain a top-notch level resulting in healthy skin and nourished hair. Also, with interactive chatbot, your skincare queries are just a tap away. All of this, along with appointments with top dermatologists of the world will ensure a self-care regimen that is flawless.
From Consultations to Exclusive Events: The Luxe Experience
Now, with Clinikally Luxe, experience seamless
dermatologist consultations
, exclusive launches of various products and exclusive sales, all under one roof. Deciphering various beauty secrets of different parts of the world to bring to you various top selling brands and products shall ensure that your beauty regimen and hair care routine takes a step further so that you may have a lavish and luxe experience.
Inside Our Curated Collection
Come, delve with us into our curated luxe collection to explore a wide range of products. A cure for all skin concerns, be it blemishes,
pigmentation
,
acne
, dry patches, or hair fall; we got you covered with a vast range of science-backed skincare and haircare products, along with a pinch of luxury sprinkled on it.
Spotlight on Clinikally Luxe's Signature Brands
Clinikally Luxe is specifically designed by keeping our evolving Indian customer in mind. With an increased awareness among the public about skincare and haircare, and a desire to try and incorporate new, prestigious skincare and  haircare products in the beauty regimen, our Indian Customer has evolved and now has a capacity to invest in certain luxury self care items.
Currently, the brands curated for Clinikally Luxe are:
Avene
Beautywise
Babe Laboratorios
Clinikally
Coola
Catalysis
CeraVe
Crystal Tomato
Cosrx
Root Deep
Dermaceutic Laboratoire
Dermalogica
Ducray Laboratoires Dermatologiques
Eve Lom
Epique Switzerland
Embryolisse Laboratoires
Rene Furturer Paris
Genosys
iS Clinical
ISDIN
Ivatherm
La Roche-Posay Laboratoire Pharmaceutique
Nutrova
Philip B
Sesderma
Soteri Skin
Shangpree
Swiss Perfection
Trilogy
Ultra V
Verso
Winston
Yuderma Laboratorie
This is not the end. This list is continuously growing as we add new products with newer technologies for achieving the best results. Clinikally offers cutting-edge skin solutions and luxurious hair nourishment products for a luxury beauty experience. These brands promise skin rejuvenation and hair revitalization, along with numerous other skin and hair benefits.
Advanced Ingredients for Unmatched Results
Clinikally Luxe aims at providing an access to the best quality of ingredients for skincare and haircare. Combining nature's goodness with lab-made active ingredients, ensures the delivery of efficient results. Bringing forth the ingredients that were never heard before, due to geographical distance, but are a staple in different cultures, we at Clinikally Luxe strive to make skincare and haircare rituals and regimens of various regions easily accessible.
Experience the goodness of Korean Magnolia Officinalis Bark extract along with diamond powder in one of its kind
Shangpree Diamond Luminous Cream
or indulge in the luxurious
iS Clinical Youth Intensive Creme
containing botanically derived copper tripeptide growth factor,
vitamin C
,
Hyaluronic Acid
and Superoxide Dismutase for lavish skincare all in one click. And, this is not all!  Strengthen your hair and revitalise the scalp with
Ducray Neoptide Thinning Hair Lotion For Women
and various other products.
Clinikally Luxe
is indeed your ‘One Stop Shop’ for all of your haircare and skincare needs.
The Future of Luxury
Skin & Hair Care with Clinikally Luxe
With a vision to revolutionise the way people avail skincare and haircare products, Clinikally Luxe aims to strive for the best. We envision making all the worldwide leading brands and trending products available to the masses in a single click. The products approved and selected by the top dermatologists of the country, are the ones that are not only science-backed beauty and care products, but also have a touch of nature and humanitarian ethics. Such products, both in skincare and haircare lines, shall find their way to Clinikally Luxe. We are expanding and will continue to grow!