Thyroid issues occur when your thyroid gland generates insufficient or excessive amounts of particular hormones. Hypothyroidism, or underactive thyroid, can produce a variety of symptoms, including weight gain and weariness. Because the illness progresses slowly, many patients do not experience symptoms until months or years later. Hyperthyroidism, or an overactive thyroid, can produce a wide range of symptoms, including weight loss and anxiousness. Both disorders can result in dry, brittle, or thinning hair on the scalp and body. Read on to find out what you can do if your thyroid problem is harming your hair.
Understanding the Connection Between Thyroid and Hair Fall
Hair loss
can occur with severe and persistent hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism. The loss is diffuse, affecting the entire scalp rather than specific locations. The hair looks to be consistently sparse. Regrowth is common after effective thyroid disease treatment, but it may take many months and be partial. Mild (e.g., subclinical) hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism, as well as short-lived thyroid disorders, are unlikely to induce hair loss.
Some kinds of hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism appear suddenly and are identified early, whereas others may be present for months or years before diagnosis. Thyroid illness-related hair loss appears several months after the disease begins. This is related to the prolonged hair cycle. In such circumstances, hair loss may occur as a result of thyroid treatment, and the thyroid medication may be incorrectly blamed, resulting in treatment cessation, which may exacerbate the hair loss.
How Thyroid Imbalances Affect Hair Health
Hair loss can occur with severe and persistent hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism. The loss is diffuse, affecting the entire scalp rather than specific locations. The hair looks to be consistently sparse. Regrowth is common after effective thyroid disease treatment, but it may take many months and be partial.
Common Symptoms of Thyroid-Related Hair Loss
Hair loss due to thyroid disorders has more specific symptoms, such as diffuse hair thinning. Hair loss is generally seen as diffuse thinning rather than particular
bald
areas. You may notice a decrease in hair density and volume across your scalp.
Diagnosing Thyroid Disorders
The first blood test used to diagnose hypothyroidism detects the level of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) in the blood. If it is elevated, the test is repeated, along with a blood test for the thyroid hormone T-4. If the findings show that TSH is high but T-4 is low, the diagnosis is hypothyroidism.
Dietary Changes to Support Thyroid Health
A nutritious diet is important for everyone, but research indicates that certain dietary changes can be especially beneficial for people with hypothyroidism. Hashimoto's thyroiditis is the leading cause of hypothyroidism in the United States. It is an autoimmune illness in which white blood cells, known as lymphocytes, gradually destroy thyroid tissue.
Hashimoto's thyroiditis is more frequent in women and often starts between the ages of 30 and 50, but men and younger people can also get the disease. Many studies have found that dietary adjustments can help people with Hashimoto's thyroiditis in a variety of ways. This includes boosting thyroid function, maintaining a healthy body weight, and alleviating hypothyroidism symptoms.
Some dietary patterns that have been demonstrated to be beneficial for people with Hashimoto's thyroiditis include gluten-free diets, autoimmune elimination diets, and anti-inflammatory diets. Gluten-free diets, for example, may aid in boosting thyroid function. Furthermore, diets rich in vegetables and fruits may protect against cellular damage and promote healthy body weight maintenance in patients with Hashimoto's thyroiditis.
Some research suggests that elimination diets, such as a modified paleo diet, may help reduce symptoms like fatigue and enhance the quality of life in patients with Hashimoto's thyroiditis. Following a balanced, calorie-controlled diet can also help support weight loss, something some people with hypothyroidism may struggle with. Furthermore, dietary deficits can exacerbate hypothyroid symptoms such as fatigue, anxiety, and a low mood.
Some deficiencies that may be responsible for aggravating these symptoms include:
vitamin D
Zinc
Thiamine
vitamin B6
Iodine
Magnesium
selenium
As a result, it is important to maintain a well-balanced diet that contains adequate amounts of both macronutrients and micronutrients.
Incorporating Iodine-Rich Foods
Seaweed
: Seaweed is rich in
antioxidants
, vitamins, and minerals. It is also low in calories. Seaweed is one of the most effective natural sources of iodine. However, the amount varies greatly depending on the type of seaweed, the region in which it was grown, and how it is prepared. Kombu kelp, wakame, and nori are three common forms of seaweed.
Cod
: Cod is a versatile white fish that is delicate in texture and has a mild flavor. It is relatively low in fat and calories but offers a wide variety of minerals and nutrients, including iodine.
Dairy
: Dairy products are abundant sources of iodine, particularly in American diets. The amount of iodine in milk and dairy products varies substantially depending on the iodine concentration of the cattle diet and the usage of iodine-containing disinfectants during milking.
Iodized Salt
: Both iodized and uniodized salt are available in the United States. The addition of iodine to table salt began in the United States in the early 1920s to assist reduce the incidence of goiters, or thyroid gland swelling.
Shrimp
: Shrimp is a low-calorie, protein-rich shellfish with a high iodine content. Furthermore, shrimp contain essential nutrients like vitamin B12, selenium, and phosphorus. Shrimp and other shellfish are rich providers of iodine because they absorb part of the naturally occurring iodine in seawater.
Tuna
: Tuna is a low-calorie, high-protein, and iodine-rich food. It also contains high levels of potassium, iron, and B vitamins. Tuna contains omega-3 fatty acids, which may reduce the risk of heart disease. Higher-fat fish contain less iodine. Tuna contains less iodine than leaner fish species like cod, since it is a fatter fish.
Eggs
: Eggs are a rich source of iodine. For fewer than 100 calories, one whole egg contains lean protein, healthy fats, and a variety of vitamins and minerals. The majority of these nutrients, including iodine, come from the yolk.
Prunes
: Prunes are dry plums. Prunes are a great vegetarian and vegan source of iodine. Five dried prunes provide 13 mcg of iodine or about 9% of the necessary amount. Prunes are widely known for their ability to alleviate constipation. This is due to the high content of fiber and sorbitol, a type of sugar alcohol. Prunes include a wide range of vitamins and nutrients, including vitamin K, A, potassium, and iron.
Lima Beans
: Lima beans are commonly connected with the popular Native American dish succotash, which blends lima beans with maize. Lima beans are abundant in fiber, magnesium, and folate, making them a good choice for cardiovascular health. They're also a good vegetarian or vegan source of iodine.
Benefits of Selenium and Zinc
A significant correlation between dietary selenium and zinc intakes and the incidence of new-onset hypothyroidism suggests that lower dietary selenium and zinc intakes may be associated with an increased risk of new-onset hypothyroidism. Some trace elements are necessary for proper thyroid hormone metabolism.
Importance of Omega-3 Fatty Acids
These lipids contribute to the regulation of T3 and T4 hormone production, which is essential for maintaining a healthy metabolism, body temperature, and energy levels. Omega-3s, by promoting thyroid hormone production, may relieve hypothyroidism symptoms such as weight gain and sluggishness.
Herbal Remedies for Thyroid and Hair Fall
Coconut oil provides numerous health benefits. Coconut oil, which is high in saturated fats, can significantly treat hypothyroidism. You can also massage your scalp with hot coconut oil. Leave it on for about 30 minutes before washing off with a light shampoo. This hot oil massage will enhance circulation and promote
hair growth
. You may also put curry leaves and fenugreek seeds into coconut oil, warm it up, drain it, and use it to massage your hair.
Evening primrose oil is another oil that might help promote healthy hair development. This oil, which contains GLA or gamma-linolenic acid (omega-6 fatty acid), is known to restore hormonal balance (a factor that causes hair loss). You can take the oil in capsules or massage it into your hair and scalp.
Biotin supplements can be useful, but only if prescribed by a doctor.
Everyone understands the importance of vitamins (particularly vitamins C and E) in promoting healthy hair development. To treat thyroid hair loss with elan, supplement your diet with foods high in
Vitamin C
and Vitamin E (citrus fruits, avocados, almonds, sunflower seeds, spinach, and palm oil).
Sea kelp can also help restore the thyroid gland's natural function, reversing hair loss. You can take it as dry flakes or as a supplement.
Ayurveda and natural herbs can work wonders to treat thyroid disorders and associated hair problems. Amla, Brahmi, Ashwagandha, Bhringaraaja, and Neem are some of the most regularly utilized herbs.
Meditation and yoga can be effective in treating hair problems.
Ashwagandha for Thyroid Function
Ashwagandha may raise thyroid hormone levels, which is good news for those with hypothyroidism. People with hyperthyroidism, on the other hand, should avoid ashwagandha to avoid thyrotoxicosis (excess thyroid hormone in the body), unless advised otherwise by a doctor or
dermatologists
.
Guggul for Balancing Hormones
Guggul may stimulate the production of thyroid hormones in the body. Taking guggul in conjunction with thyroid hormone therapy may improve the effectiveness and side effects of thyroid hormones.
Saw Palmetto for Hair Growth
In research comparing its efficacy to that of the DHT-blocking medicine Finasteride, only 38% of patients treated with saw palmetto experienced increased hair regrowth, whereas 68% of those treated with Finasteride did.
Essential Oils and Their Benefits
Hyperthyroidism is a disorder in which your body creates excessive thyroid hormone. Typical symptoms include weight loss, anxiety, abnormal heartbeats, and muscle weakness. The thyroid gland itself may seem or feel irritated. While essential oils cannot prevent your body from creating excessive thyroid hormone, they can help alleviate hyperthyroidism symptoms.
Lavender Oil for Hair Strengthening
If you suffer from hyperthyroidism-related anxiety, lavender oil may help. Lavender oil has been used for ages to help people relax. When diffused into the air, lavender oil has been shown to promote sensations of serenity and well-being.
Rosemary Oil for Scalp Health
Rosemary oil has antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and antibacterial qualities, and it helps stimulate blood flow to the scalp. This could be why it can help with hair regrowth, as it is quite similar to the mechanisms by which
minoxidil
works.
Peppermint Oil for Stimulating Hair Follicles
Peppermint oil is proven to improve digestion. Inhaling peppermint oil might help alleviate nausea. If you have a slow metabolism due to an underactive thyroid, try adding food-grade peppermint to a cup of decaffeinated herbal tea every night. You may also use the essential oil in a diffuser or dilute it in a carrier oil and massage it into your abdomen.
Lifestyle Changes to Improve Thyroid Function
Nourish Your Body
: Your diet is essential. Fuel your body with thyroid-friendly meals. Include iodine-rich foods such as shellfish, dairy products, and iodized salt. Don't forget about selenium, which is found in nuts, whole grains, and lean meats. A well-balanced diet can help regulate your thyroid.
Exercise Regularly
: Moving your body helps not only your waistline but also your thyroid. Regular exercise stimulates your metabolism and allows your thyroid to function efficiently. Whether it's a brisk stroll, a dance class, or a jog around the park, pick things you enjoy and include them in your daily routine.
Manage Stress
: Stress can cause thyroid issues. Try stress-reduction techniques such as deep breathing, meditation, or yoga. These measures can help reduce stress hormone levels and keep your thyroid healthy.
Sleep
: Getting adequate sleep can significantly improve your thyroid health. Aim for 7-9 hours of good sleep per night.
Hydration
: Water benefits the entire body, including the thyroid. Stay hydrated to help with metabolism and thyroid hormone conversion.
Limit Processed Foods and Sugar
: Processed foods and excessive sugar can have a harmful impact on thyroid function. Choose whole, unprocessed meals instead. You'll most likely feel more energized.
Managing Stress Levels
Taking time to contemplate or meditate might help your body relax. As a result, relaxation lowers stress and has a less negative impact on your thyroid. There are numerous ways to relax. Crafting can help some people relax and unwind.
Regular Exercise and Its Benefits
Exercising with hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism has numerous benefits. It boosts energy, improves sleep quality, and alleviates other symptoms of thyroid disease. However, if your thyroid levels are not under control, exercise may cause issues.
Importance of Adequate Sleep
This suggests that adequate sleep is required to regulate and release thyroid hormones. Sleep deprivation and disruption of an individual's circadian clock are linked to other metabolic problems such as obesity, insulin resistance, and diabetes.
Supplements to Consider
Selenium
: Selenium, a mineral required for thyroid hormone production, protects the thyroid from damage induced by oxidative stress. The thyroid contains considerable levels of selenium, and a shortage can cause thyroid dysfunction.
Iodine
: Iodine is necessary for thyroid function. In reality, the only known function of iodine is to aid in thyroid hormone production. Triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4) are thyroid hormones containing iodine. Iodine shortages lead to thyroid illness.
Zinc
:
The mineral zinc is necessary for thyroid hormone synthesis. An appropriate zinc concentration is required for healthy levels of T3, T4, and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH).
Iron
: The thyroid requires iron to convert T4 to T3, the active form of thyroid hormone. Iron deficiency is associated with thyroid dysfunction.
Vitamin D and Its Role
The majority of research into the effect of vitamin D (cholecalciferol) supplementation on thyroid function was conducted in patients with autoimmune thyroid disorders. In almost all investigations, vitamin D administration resulted in a considerable reduction in anti-thyroid antibody (TPOAb and TgAb) levels.
B-Complex Vitamins for Hair Health
It can arise as a result of endocrine disorders such as thyroid hormone insufficiency or other medical conditions. If you are deficient in riboflavin, you may experience hair loss, skin problems, a sore throat, and itchy, red eyes.
Magnesium for Thyroid Support
We require magnesium to convert the dormant thyroid hormone T4 to the active thyroid hormone T3. Without this conversion, cells will not absorb the more potent form of thyroid hormone. As a result, insufficient magnesium levels prevent our thyroid from functioning properly.
Natural Hair Masks and Treatments
Treat nutritional deficiencies:
Even if you don't have a thyroid disease, nutritional inadequacies can cause hair loss. Researchers indicate that the following nutrients may play a role in hair retention and loss: vitamins B-7 (biotin) and B complex, zinc, copper, iron, vitamins C, E, and A, coenzyme Q10, and iron.
Eat well:
A whole-foods-based diet is essential for good health. If you eat calcium-rich foods while being treated for hypothyroidism, try timing them at least four hours after your levothyroxine dose for optimal absorption. Processed foods, such as sugar, red meat, and fried foods, might trigger an inflammatory reaction. Caffeine and alcohol may also contribute. Inflammation can increase thyroid problems, including hair loss.
Add anti-inflammatory foods
:
Ginger and turmeric are anti-inflammatory foods that may improve endocrine function. Your thyroid is part of the endocrine system, so supporting it may help with the symptoms of thyroid disorders. Try incorporating fresh ginger or turmeric root into cooking. They taste great in anything from stir-fries to smoothies. Discuss supplementation with your doctor.
Coconut Oil and Curry Leaves Mask
It minimizes hair loss, eliminates
dandruff
, thoroughly cleanses the hair, and makes it longer and shinier. Curry leaves contain a high concentration of protein, which is necessary for hair growth and general hair health.
Aloe Vera and Castor Oil Treatment
In a tiny bottle, add 9 parts aloe vera gel and 1 part castor oil and shake well. Keep the combination in the fridge for an even cooler effect on your skin. Massage the oil and aloe straight into your skin, particularly around or
under eyes
, to tighten and hydrate it.
Fenugreek Seeds and Yogurt Hair Pack
Fenugreek
hair oil
improves blood circulation and reduces dandruff. Fenugreek seeds are high in protein and nicotinic acid and are well-known for their ability to combat hair loss and dandruff. It also heals hair dryness, regulates baldness, and prevents hair thinning.
Avoiding Harmful Chemicals and Products
It has been demonstrated that chemicals can be easily absorbed through the skin. Many traditional hygiene products have substances and perfumes that can harm your thyroid health. So, for an easy home detox, make sure you use natural, fragrance-free items. This is especially true for skin-care products such as soaps,
lotions
,
shampoos
, and deodorants.
Choosing Sulfate-Free Shampoos
When picking a sulfate-free shampoo for thyroid health, look for chemicals that are soft on the scalp and hair, as thyroid abnormalities can make hair more delicate and prone to breaking. Some important variables to remember include biotin, keratin, aloe vera, tea tree oil, argan oil, vitamins E and B5, and natural extracts.
Benefits of Natural Hair Care Products
Some disciplines of alternative medicine utilize specific plants to treat hair loss caused by illnesses such as alopecia. Palmetto, black cohosh, dong quai, fake unicorn, chasteberry, and red clover are all herbs that are taken orally. Before attempting herbal remedies on your own, consult with your doctor, especially since none of these herbs are licensed for treating hair loss and no research has been conducted to definitively prove their support.
Avoiding Heat Styling Tools
Utilize microfiber towels.
Blow dry with the coolest setting.
Shampooing and conditioning correctly is important.
Try the heatless beach waves!
You can braid your hair.
Utilize hair rollers.
Scrunch your locks.
Hydration and Its Importance
Hydration
is the process of replenishing body fluids lost by sweating, breathing, and removing waste. On average, the body loses and replaces approximately 2-3 quarts of water per day. Fortunately, many of the meals we consume are primarily composed of water. Greens, as well as the majority of fruits and vegetables, are high in water.
Drinking Adequate Water Daily
Water is essential to our health. It is essential for numerous bodily processes, such as delivering nutrition to cells, eliminating waste, protecting joints and organs, and controlling body temperature. Water should almost always be your preferred beverage.
Benefits of Herbal Teas
Numerous studies have shown that a variety of teas can improve your immune system, decrease inflammation, and even protect against cancer and heart disease. While some teas offer more health benefits than others, there is ample evidence that drinking tea regularly can have a long-term impact on your well-being.
Hydrating Foods for Hair and Thyroid Health
Avocados are high in healthy fats, vitamins E, and B, which promote hair strength and growth.
Nuts and seeds contain omega-3 fatty acids, zinc, and vitamin E.
Sweet potatoes are high in beta-carotene, which the body converts into vitamin A, promoting a healthy scalp.
Berries are high in antioxidants and vitamins, which promote hair growth.
Legumes are high in protein, iron, zinc, and biotin.
Regular Health Check-Ups
To determine thyroid function, healthcare providers may do a series of blood tests. The two most popular tests measure TSH (thyroid-stimulating hormone) and T4 or free T4 (thyroxine). Providers may also prescribe a complete thyroid blood test panel.