Hair loss
(Alopecia) can affect your whole body or just your scalp, and it may be transient or permanent. It may result from heredity, hormonal changes, clinical situations, or a normal part of ageing. Both men and women can get hair loss, but it is more common in men.
Excessive hair loss from your scalp is referred to as baldness. Genetic hair loss due to ageing is the most common cause of baldness. Many people prefer to leave hair loss hidden and untreated. Different hairstyles, wigs, scarves, and hats are other common ways of covering it up. Very few people choose to get hair loss treated. Before treating your hair loss, it is essential to consult a doctor. This is important because a doctor will analyse the problem in-depth, know the exact cause of the hair loss, and then develop the most suitable treatment.
Depending on what’s causing it, hair loss can appear in different ways. It can happen suddenly or can happen over a period of time. It may or may not affect your whole body. Some of the most common hair loss symptoms include gradual thinning of hair on the scalp, circular/patchy bald spots, sudden hair loss, losing hair on the entire body, and patches of scaling that spread over the scalp. Losing 50-100 strands of hair in one day is just natural. We usually don’t notice losing these many strands of hair because new ones grow simultaneously. But it’s a cause of concern when new strands of hair are not replaced by new ones.
Hair loss
can be traumatic. It can most certainly cause anxiety and stress in anyone facing it. You need to consult a doctor if your hair loss is persistent, you need to consult a doctor. Don’t wait for your hair loss to become noticeable. Prolonged hair loss can also cause permanent baldness.
Taking treatment from a qualified doctor can definitely help stop or slow
hair loss
. It is also possible to regrow hair. The effectiveness of the treatment is likely to increase and prevent further hair loss if you start the treatment early. Book a
video consult
at just INR 149/- from the comfort of your home and get personalised treatment plans.