Retinoic acid, a Vitamin A metabolite, has an important role in skin and hair biology. This blog provides an overview of its effects on hair follicles and epidermal stem cells.
The Science Behind Retinoic Acid
Retinoic acid affects genome expression by increasing the appearance of some proteins and decreasing the expression of others. The presence of an intracellular retinoic acid-binding protein may mediate the physiological effects of retinoic acid on cellular development.
What is Retinoic Acid?
Vitamin A is acquired solely from food and cannot be produced in the body of any animal. It is esterified and stored in the liver, the most abundant vitamin A source outside of supplementation. Retinoic acid is produced from
retinol
by two enzymatic reactions: the first is a reversible oxidation of retinol to retinal, followed by an irreversible oxidation reaction to retinoic acid.
Retinoic acid, like other retinoids, is light-sensitive due to the alternating double bonds between the carbon atoms in its hydrophobic tail, which is connected to a 6-carbon ring. The compound's low molecular weight makes it highly fat-soluble, allowing it to rapidly permeate across cell membranes.
Retinoic Acid vs. Other Forms of Vitamin A
Retinol is a member of the retinoids subfamily of Vitamin A, which helps promote cell turnover and expedite skin renewal, thereby leveling out
pigmentation
and smoothing skin damage caused by ageing.
How Retinoic Acid Works in the Skin
Retinol is a kind of retinoid derived from vitamin A. It does not remove dead skin cells like many other mature skin products do. Instead, the tiny molecules that comprise retinol travel deep beneath the epidermis (the outer layer of skin) to your dermis. Once in the middle layer of the skin, retinol helps to neutralize free radicals. This increases the production of elastin and
collagen
, resulting in a "plumping" effect that can lessen the look of
Fine lines
Wrinkles
Enlarged pores
While retinol is sometimes used to treat
acne
and associated scarring, severe acne is often treated with a prescription retinoid in conjunction with other drugs that target inflammation and germs. Finally, retinol exfoliates the skin's surface, which can improve texture and tone.
Benefits of Retinoic Acid for Hair and Skin
Retinoic acid regulates hair follicle stem cells in a dose-dependent manner, impacting hair cycle function, wound healing, and melanocyte stem cell activity. Retinoic acid also has a dose-dependent and temporal effect on melanocyte differentiation and proliferation.
Promoting Hair Growth: The Role of Retinoic Acid
RA is a metabolic metabolite of vitamin A (retinol) that communicates in both paracrine and autocrine ways, promoting
hair growth
. RA is necessary for hindbrain patterning during development, as well as patterning the neural tube's dorsoventral axis with sonic hedgehog and bone morphogenetic proteins.
Epidermal Stem Cells: Regeneration and Repair
Epidermal stem cells (ESCs) play an important role in skin homeostasis and wound healing. They are found in the basal layer of the epidermis and aid in the daily regeneration of various layers of the epidermis, the synthesis of dermal collagen, and the improvement in skin tensile strength.
Anti-Aging Benefits: Smoothing Fine Lines and Wrinkles
Reduces visible signs of aging, including fine lines and wrinkles.
You will appear refreshed, younger, and more vibrant.
Improve your natural beauty.
The skin has been rejuvenated.
Prompt results.
There is no downtime.
This is a non-invasive procedure.
Safe Application of Retinoic Acid
Mechanism of action
Application
Retinoic acid
Stimulates epidermal cell proliferation, accelerates the elimination of sebum remaining in ducts, thus reducing inflammation in sebaceous glands, loosens connections among cells in stratum corneum, and inhibits keratosis.
Acne,
psoriasis
, chronic inflammation of the sebaceous glands and hair follicles
How to Incorporate Retinoic Acid into Your Routine
To properly use retinol, follow a step-by-step guide to maximize its benefits while minimizing redness, dryness, and sensitivities.
Apply a small amount of retinol to clean,
dry skin
.
When using gel retinol, a pea-sized amount is ideal; for creams, serums, and lotions, one pump about the size of your fingertip or smaller should suffice.
Apply the retinol to the face using a quadrant system. Apply a small amount to each area: the forehead, chin, and both cheeks.
Rub the retinol into the skin until no product remains.
Apply a light
moisturizer
and, if desired, finish with a face oil.
In the morning, thoroughly cleanse your skin, follow your usual morning skincare routine, and apply broad-spectrum
sunscreen
.
Potential Side Effects and How to Manage Them
The side effects of topical retinol treatment are usually temporary. They include the following:
Dry and irritated skin.
Itching and burning.
Redness, peeling, flaky, or scaly skin.
Sunburn.
These side effects should gradually subside as your skin adjusts to the new treatment.
Choosing the Right Retinoic Acid Products
Here are the steps for selecting the best retinol acid for you:
Know your skin's type and condition.
Determine how easily your skin reacts.
Determine what type of product you want to start with.
Always start low and slow, and run a test patch before going all-in.
Conclusion: Embracing Retinoic Acid for Optimal Hair and Skin Health
Retinol acid is a miracle skincare ingredient for many people, and to get the most out of it, you will need to stick to a well-rounded skincare routine for years. However, remember that your skin changes as you age, so the retinol products and application procedures that work for you now may need to be adjusted in the future. That is why it is always ideal to adjust your retinol program to your skin's current demands.
Whether you're new to retinol acid or have been using it for years, it's an ingredient that requires patience and consistency to provide effects. Choose a retinol that is both effective and enjoyable to use. Always prioritize your skin's health and needs, and consult with an aesthetician or
dermatologist
if necessary.